# Tree names

## Names

Humans instinctively classify the variation they see in the natural
world and apply names to those classes (e.g., “mango”). If the mental
model of a class is the same for the speaker and the listener,
effective communication is possible.  Cultural naming systems, or
_folk taxonomies_, are the same as scientific taxonomies in this way,
but the latter also contain processes for explicitly connecting a name
to an organism or set of organisms. For each scientific name there is
a single _type specimen_ in a museum somewhere which is the official
bearer of the name and which can be reviewed by others. Additionally,
taxonomists may also publish detailed accounts of a group of organisms
that share the same name: they create an explicit _circumscription_ or
taxonomic concept.

The situation is further complicated because many folk names refer to
groups of species, not just single species (the basic unit of
biological variation). Again, “mango” may be applied to a range of
species in Asian countries where there are more than one; in the
Americas, where mangoes are not native, there is generally only the
species _Mangifera indica_. Similarly, “oak” may refer to tens or of
species in some countries.  In many cultures, where a broad,
multi-species name is used, additional specifiers are added to
indicate a single species, e.g., “gambel oak”.

Because the creators and users of Greenstand images come from many
cultures, and are generally not experienced at looking at the
variation of plants, we need to use scientific names to communicate
about the plants. We need also to refer to the particular _species_,
because there may be great ecological variation among species in a
genus; for example not all species in _Acacia_ (a genus), are
ecologically similar to _Acacia mangium_ (a species).

## Morphotyping

The process of finding the scientific species name for a plant in a
Greenstand photo can be difficult. While some species are
_distinctive_ and _common_ and a tropical botanist may know then
instantly, some will be morphologically close to other species, and
may be uncommon. The first step in naming the species is to **search**
through the images for different species.  Since planters often only
plant a few species at a time, searching requires subsampling the full
time range and spatial range of plantings in a geographical area.

The next step is to assign **morphotype** (or _morphospecies_) codes
to a putative species, based on the first image or first few images.
We are using eight character codes. These codes can be anything and
need not be related to the name of a suspected species, though if the
species is indeed recognized the code may be derived from the first
four letters of the genus and species.  The value of these codes is
that i) if a species name is misapplied at first, and later changed,
the reference ID code stays unchanged (this happens a lot!), and ii)
if a morphotype is not recognized, it can still have a code; see,
e.g., [`INDE0002`][1] in the herbarium, “Indeterminate #2”, a fairly
common species in Haiti that we still do not have a scientific name
for.

After creating ‘bins’ (folders for images) with morphotype codes, we
**match** subsequent images, shuffling them into a folder based on
their appearance. As the numbers build up and we have more opportunity
to view variation among individuals, we may need to _split_ a folder
into two, or _lump_ two folders into one. We can then create a
_synonym_ table, keeping one code current or active, and linking
other, now unused, codes to it. For instance if we are looking at
1,000 captures from Haiti, we might end up with 20 folders. Generally,
a few species will account for most of the individuals, with some only
having a few images, and some only having one.  Eventually we try to
match morphotypes across countries and continents. Some restoration
species are ubiquitous around the work, some are local.

## Identification

The final step is to try to **identify** the species to scientific
name. This requires internet searches, going to (real or virtual)
libraries, and communication with experts in an area. If ‘side data’
about the local name of a plant could be captured, this would help a
lot.  Once we can link to a scientific name, we can access and
incorporate large amounts of external information (distribution in
different countries, ecological characteristics, risk of invasiveness,
etc.); for those with a database background: the scientific name
becomes a _key_ permitting links to global data tables of species
information.

## Data

As this data structure develops we are capturing it in a database (in
the form of a single [XML document][2]), and making the data available
as a dynamically generated **virtual herbarium**, with country-based
sub-herbaria (e.g., for [Haiti][3]).

This herbarium is now a resource for Greenstand volunteers using CVAT,
who are giving the eight character **taxon codes** to the images they
review.

[1]: https://herbarium.treetracker.org/guide/INDE0002.html
[2]: https://github.com/Greenstand/Tree_Species/blob/master/tree_species.xml
[3]: https://herbarium.treetracker.org/guide/guide_ht.html
